<!-- DO NOT MODIFY                   -->
<!-- this file is generated by mdref -->
<!-- from doc/src/README.md          -->

# A declarative Frontend for the Kubernetes Multi-Cluster Runtime Library


This project provides a wrapper for the Kubernetes [Multi-CLuster Runtime Library](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/multicluster-runtime). It supports a more declarative API for the orchestration of a controller manager.

- *Declarative API*

  This is achieved by strictly distinguishing between code for orchestrating the controller manager and the functional code for the controllers.
  The first part is completely replaced by some declarative-like code and the effective  orchestration is done based on those declarations without further
  use code.

  The second part is provided by factories configured in the declarative part.

  This might look less flexible, but it avoids lots of intransparent boilerplate code for standard use cases. And, if required, implementing an own `Component` can be used to directly access the underlying controller runtime library.

  So far, the following elements are supported:
  - Controllers
  - Indices
  - Arbitrary Components based on the multi-cluster runtime library.


- *Automated Command Line Option Handling*

  Additionally, the handling of [command line options](doc/options.md#options) is also done by the library.
  Factories just need to implement the `Options` API to add command line flags.
  The aggregation to the command line options using a `pflag.FlagSet` is automated by the library.

- *Support for Controllers using multiple clusters*

  The library supports controllers working on multiple clusters by introducing
  logical clusters for functional elements.
  Those elements can be arbitrarily orchestrated into a single controller manager.
  The mapping of logical clusters to physical ones is done based on the
  given command line options and is completely transparent for the elements as long as the library API is used.


- *Transparent Support for Fleet Environments like KCP*

  Controllers can work with fleets similat to single clusters using the
  same API. The library functions implicitly handle the fleet cluster instance
  by using the `context.Context`. 


- *Cross-CLuster/Namespace Owner Handling*

  It is possible to establish, track and get triggered by cross-cluster or cross-namespace ownership relations.

More detailed information is described for the following topics
# - [Options](doc/options.md#options)
# - [Clusters](doc/clusters.md#clusters)
# - [Controller Manager](doc/manager.md#manager)
# - [Controllers](doc/controllers.md#controllers)
# - [Indices](doc/indices.md#indices)
# - [Owner Handling](doc/owners.md#owners)

## Walkthrough

To illustrate the usage and the descriptive power of the library we use a simple
example: we want to create a set of controllers orchestrated into a
controller manager replicating config resources with a particular annotation
into another custer.

There are two directitions:
- *from source to target (called up)*

  here typically the spec part of an object is replicated (in our example the complete object)
- *from target to sour e (called down)*

  here typically the status part is replicated bach to the surce object. For `ConfigMaps` there is no status, but we have to hanle the unexpected deletion.

What we can see already from this specification, there is the need to work with (potentially) different clusters, the source and the target cluster
(which might be identical for special cases).

Therefore, multiple clusters play a central role in this library. 
It uses so-called [*logical clusters*](doc/clusters.md#clusters). Every element, like a controller may declare and use multiple clusters represented by arbitrary names unique in the context of an element definition.

### Our first controller

So, we start with our first controller, the *replicate* controller replicating an object from source to target.

```go

type Resource = v1.ConfigMap

func Controller() controller.Definition {
	return controller.Define[*Resource, Resource](
		"up",
		controllers.SOURCE,
		support.NewByLogic[*controllers.Options, *controllers.Settings, *Resource, Resource](&ReconcilationLogic{}),
	).
		UseCluster(controllers.TARGET).
		AddTrigger(controller.OwnerTrigger[*Resource]().OnCluster(controllers.TARGET))
}
```

We do this by providing a function `Controller`, which creates a `controller.Definition`.
It has some unique name and declares which clusters it should work on, and on which main resource the reconciler should work.

To support typed resource indices at the definition level, the resource must be declared by its pointer and non-pointer type. We want to use the constraint `client.Object` to assure that it is a resource type, which is not implemented by the non-pointer type. But for the index we need the non-pointer type, because the `List` operation requires it for the result type. While it is possible to derive a pointer type from any type, it is not possible in Go to derive the non-pointer type from a pointer type.

Because we want to replicate, we need access to two clusters, the main cluster (for the watch) of the controller is the source cluster (using the constant `SOURCE`). But we need a second one, the target cluster. This is specified by adding `UseCluster`, which declares additional clusters. 

With `AddTrigger(controller.OwnerTrigger[*Resource]().OnCluster(controllers.TARGET))` 
a watch on the target cluster is requested using the [owner information](doc/owners.md#owners) on
a target resource to trigger the reconcilation on changes on the replica.

Then we need to describe the reconcilation logic. This is done by providing a factory
able to create a regular `reconcile.Reconciler` from the controller runtime, when the definition is instantiated.

This factory just returns a regular cluster-runtime reconciler featuring the logic. But we want to
use some more comfort and decide to use a support wrapper by using a standard 
factory working on a `support.Request` object. For every reconcilation, such an object is created holding all necessary information required to implement the reconcilation step.

Part of this information is derived from the controller settings and (potential additional options).
Here, for example, we use the effective source and target cluster. These settings are bundled
in a dedicated `Settings` object:

```go
type Settings struct {
	Source cluster.ClusterEquivalent
	Target cluster.Cluster

	// common state
	Mapping Mapping
}

```

To control the replication we need some more information, which should be passed
by command line options.
This can be handled completely local to our controller code. We just create
an `Options` type passed as type parameter to our declaration method (`controllers.Options`).

```go
package controllers

import (
	"context"
	"fmt"

	"github.com/mandelsoft/flagutils"
	"github.com/spf13/pflag"
)

type Options struct {
	Annotation string
	Class      string
}

var _ flagutils.Validatable = (*Options)(nil)

func (o *Options) AddFlags(fs *pflag.FlagSet) {
	fs.StringVar(&o.Annotation, "annotation", CLASS_ANNOTATION, "annotation name holding the class")
	fs.StringVar(&o.Class, "class", "", "replication class")
}

func (o *Options) Validate(ctx context.Context, opts flagutils.OptionSet, v flagutils.ValidationSet) error {
	if o.Annotation == "" {
		return fmt.Errorf("annotation name is required")
	}
	return nil
}
```

We will use a special annotation used to hold a *replication class*. 
Only objects with a dedicated value here, will be replicated.

All this information is packed into the call to `support.NewByLogic` in addition to
our implementation object for the reconcilation logic (`ReconcilationLogic`). The method
then provides a regular factory for the cluster runtime reconciler based
an on object implementing the following interface:

```go

type ReconcilationLogic[O flagutils.Options, S any, P kubecrtutils.ObjectPointer[T], T any] interface {
	CreateSettings(ctx context.Context, o O, controller controller.TypedController[P, T]) (S, error)
	Reconcile(request *Request[O, S, P, T]) myreconcile.Problem
	ReconcileDeleting(request *Request[O, S, P, T]) myreconcile.Problem
	ReconcileDeleted(request *Request[O, S, P, T]) myreconcile.Problem
}
```

This object is two-folded:
- It provides the `Settings` from and for the concrete instantiation. This information is
  shared among all reconcilation requests and finally accessible from the used `Request`
  object.

  ```go
  
  type Request = *support.Request[*controllers.Options, *controllers.Settings, *Resource, Resource]
  
  type ReconcilationLogic struct {
  }
  
  func (r *ReconcilationLogic) CreateSettings(ctx context.Context, o *controllers.Options, c controller.TypedController[*Resource, Resource]) (*controllers.Settings, error) {
  	s := &controllers.Settings{
  		Source:  c.GetClusters().Get(controllers.SOURCE),
  		Target:  c.GetClusters().Get(controllers.TARGET).AsCluster(),
  		Mapping: controllers.NewMapping(),
  	}
  
  	log := c.GetLogger()
  	log.Info("using source {{type}} {{name}}[{{info}}]", s.Source.GetTypeInfo(), s.Source.GetEffective().GetName(), s.Source.GetTypeInfo())
  	log.Info("using target {{type}} {{name}}[{{info}}]", s.Target.GetTypeInfo(), s.Target.GetEffective().GetName(), s.Target.GetTypeInfo())
  	return s, nil
  }
  
  ```

- Implement the reconcilation interface to execute the reconcilation logic for a particular
  request. We will have a look at the implementation [later](#logic).

### The controller manager 

Before we start with our replication logic, we will first create the
main program to run the controller.

We create our main program in [examples/simple/cmd/main.go](../../examples/simple/cmd/main.go).
It consists of three very simple delarative-like parts:

1) Define the scheme you want to use

   ```go
   var (
   	scheme = runtime.NewScheme()
   )
   
   func init() {
   	utilruntime.Must(clientgoscheme.AddToScheme(scheme))
   	// +kubebuilder:scaffold:scheme
   }
   
   ```
  
  This is standard coding known from the plain controller runtinme.

2) Configure the elements for the controller manager

   ```go
   
   	def := ctrlmgmt.Define("replicator.mandelsoft.de", controllers.SOURCE).
   		WithScheme(scheme).
   		AddCluster(
   			cluster.Define(controllers.SOURCE, "replication source").WithFallback(cluster.DEFAULT),
   			cluster.Define(controllers.TARGET, "replication target").WithFallback(controllers.SOURCE),
   		).
   		AddController(
   			replicate.Controller(),
   		)
   ```

  Similar to the controller declaration, it is a declaration refering to our earlier
  declaration methods (like `Controller()`).

3) Configure the options you want to use

   ```
   	options := &flagutils.DefaultOptionSet{}
   
   	options.Add(
   		metricsopts.New(),    // options to control the manager metrics service
   		mlogopts.New(true),   // options to control mandelsoft/logging
   		activationopts.New(), // enable controller selection
   		// other options
   	)
   ```

   Here, some standard options are composed. We want to use the metrics server,
   configure the logging, and we want to be able to activate dedicated controllers.

   All options represent functionality implemented via an `Options` object.  It may offer command line-options, but may do other things, also. It either
   directly executes those features or it implements additional configuration
   interfaces used by other components/options to retrieve configuration. For example,
   it might be able to configure the controller manager (like the metrics option).

   The controller manger definition is basically also such an option, able to instantiate
   a controller manager based on its definitions and potentially other options
   able to further configure it.

4) And finally run the complete configuration

   ```go
   	err := ctrlmgmt.Setup("replicator", options, def, os.Args[1:]...)
   	if err == pflag.ErrHelp {
   		os.Exit(0)
   	}
   	setup.ExitIfErr(err, "setup controller manager")
   ```
   
All the flags required by the configured options and all the orchestrated
components will automatically provided to a central `pflag.FlagSet`object.

The command-line flags of our example look as follows:

```
Usage of replicator:
      --annotation string                   annotation name holding the class (default "replicate.mandelsoft.de/class")
      --class string                        replication class
      --controllers strings                 activated controllers (up, all). (default [all])
      --enable-http2                        If set, HTTP/2 will be enabled for the metrics and webhook servers
      --health-probe-bind-address string    The address the probe endpoint binds to. (default ":8081")
      --kubeconfig string                   path to standard kubeconfig
      --kubeconfig-context string           context used together with kubeconfig
      --kubeconfig-identity string          context used together with kubeconfig
      --leader-elect                        Enable leader election for controller manager. Enabling this will ensure there is only one active controller manager.
      --leader-elect-namespace string       leader election namespace
      --leader-election-id string           Id for leader election
      --log-level string                    logging level (default "info")
      --log-rule stringToString             logging rules (default [])
      --metrics-bind-address string         The address the metrics endpoint binds to. Use :8443 for HTTPS or :8080 for HTTP, or leave as 0 to disable the metrics service. (default "0")
      --metrics-cert-key string             The name of the metrics server key file. (default "tls.key")
      --metrics-cert-name string            The name of the metrics server certificate file. (default "tls.crt")
      --metrics-cert-path string            The directory that contains the metrics server certificate.
      --metrics-secure                      If set, the metrics endpoint is served securely via HTTPS. Use --metrics-secure=false to use HTTP instead. (default true)
      --source-kubeconfig string            replication source
      --source-kubeconfig-context string    context used together with source-kubeconfig
      --source-kubeconfig-identity string   context used together with source-kubeconfig
      --target-kubeconfig string            replication target
      --target-kubeconfig-context string    context used together with target-kubeconfig
      --target-kubeconfig-identity string   context used together with target-kubeconfig
```

<a id="logic"></a>
### The reconcilation logic

We decided not to implement a plain reconciler for the cluster runtime but use
a `Request`-based standard implementation.

The reconcilation logic is implemented by an object implementing the interface 

```go

type ReconcilationLogic[O flagutils.Options, S any, P kubecrtutils.ObjectPointer[T], T any] interface {
	CreateSettings(ctx context.Context, o O, controller controller.TypedController[P, T]) (S, error)
	Reconcile(request *Request[O, S, P, T]) myreconcile.Problem
	ReconcileDeleting(request *Request[O, S, P, T]) myreconcile.Problem
	ReconcileDeleted(request *Request[O, S, P, T]) myreconcile.Problem
}
```

As has been seen earlier, it is used to provide a share `Settings` object holding
information shared among all reconcilation requests.

The reconcilatiuon itself is spilt into three methods:
- `Reconcile` for regular resource reconcilation
- `ReconcileDeleting` handle deletion while finalizers are still set
- `ReconcileDeleted` handle the final deletion

All three methods gain access to the reconcilatuon context by a `support.Request`
object. It looks like this:

```go
type Request[O flagutils.Options, S any, P kubecrtutils.ObjectPointer[T], T any] struct {
	*reconciler.BaseRequest[P]
	Reconciler *Reconciler[O, S, P, T]
	logic      ReconcilationLogic[O, S, P, T]
}
```

which provides access to some shared information found in the `Reconciler` object.

```go

// Reconciler includes the options and setting field.
type Reconciler[O flagutils.Options, S any, P kubecrtutils.ObjectPointer[T], T any] struct {
	logging.Logger
	Controller   controller.TypedController[P, T]
	GroupKind    schema.GroupKind
	FieldManager string
	Finalizer    string
	OwnerHandler
	Options  O
	Settings S

	request RequestFactory[O, S, P, T]
}
```

Here, you find your `Settings` and `Options`.

The dynamic information is found in the embedded `BaseRequest` field. It provides the interface

```go

type Request[T client.Object] interface {
	context.Context
	logging.Logger
	cluster.Cluster
	record.EventRecorder

	GetOptions() flagutils.Options

	GetKey() client.ObjectKey
	GetObject() T
	GetOrig() T

	StatusChanged() bool
	UpdateStatus() myreconcile.Problem
	TriggerStatusChanged()
	GetAfter() time.Duration
}
```

and some important direct fields:

```go
	mcreconcile.Request
	Object T
	Orig   T
	After  time.Duration
```

If there is a status resource, it assumes, that there ia a field `Status`
. If after a reconcilation is done and the status has been changed it is automatically updated using the status resource. This does not need to be done by the reconcilation logic implemented by the controller.

`Finalizer` and `FieldManger` fields describe the values that should/will be used by those purposes.

An [`OwnerHandler`](doc/owners.md#owners) can be used to maintain and query owner relationships. This handler
automatically handles cross-namespace and cross-cluster relationships. So, we can use this
to describe the relationship between a replica and its original resource.

Now, we can start implementing our logic.

The reconcilation methods return a `reconcile.Problem` object. It describes
- whether there is a temporary problem, which lead to a rate-limited repetition of the 
  reconcilation
- whether there is a problem with the settings of the resource, which cannot be solved by repeating the reconcilation
- whether there is a reconcilation problem handled somewhere else.

The `reconcile` package provides approprriate constructor methods:

- `Requeue(err error)` requeue in case of an error without reporting it
- `Failed(err error)`  a persistent error
- `TemporaryProblem(err error)` a temporary error solvable by rate-limited reconcilation

The recilation defined in [examples/simple/controllers/repicate/logig.go](examples/simple/controllers/repicate/logig.go)
first checks an annotation set for replicated object, to avoid recursive replicas in case of
 both clusters being identical.

Then it checks the responsibility based on the annotation information provided by the command line options. If not responsible delete a potentiall existing replica.

With

```go
	patch := client.MergeFrom(r.GetOrig())
	if controllerutil.AddFinalizer(obj, r.Reconciler.Finalizer) {
		if err := r.Patch(r, r.Object, patch); err != nil {
			return reconcile.TemporaryProblem(client.IgnoreNotFound(err))
		}
		r.Info("taking responsibility")
	}
```

a finalizer is set on the original object using the FInalizer information from the request object.

With 

```go
	// assure target namespace
	namespace := objutils.GenerateUniqueName("replica", r.Cluster.GetId(), "", r.Namespace, objutils.MAX_NAMESPACELEN)
	key := client.ObjectKey{
		Name:      r.Name,
		Namespace: namespace,
	}

	mctx := controllers.WithCluster(r, s.Target)
	prob := s.Mapping.SetOriginal(mctx, key, r.Request)
	if prob != nil {
		return prob
	}
```

the mapping between original and replica names is registered in the shared state.
Hereby, `objutils.GenerateUniqueName` is used to generate a unique name for the 
namespace used to store the replicas.

The [mapping component](examples/simple/controllers/mapping.go) also handle the
namespace vreation and deletion, by keeping track of existent replications 
for this namespace.

It is important to know, that every cluster has an assigned abstract identity.
By default, this is the name of the cluster as defined by the controller manager.
But to use clusters independent of controllers and controller managers,
command line options are provided to configure an identity for clusters.
This identity is used for the owner reference, but here also for 
the generation of the target namespace name. Whenever some persistent
names depend on a cluster, always the cluster identity should be used,
instead of the (logical) cluster name local to the controller environment.

With

```go
	// update replica
	newp := r.Object.DeepCopyObject().(*Resource)
	newp.SetNamespace(namespace)
	objutils.CleanupMeta(newp)
	objutils.SetAnnotation(newp, controllers.REPLICATED_ANNOTATION, r.Cluster.GetId())
	controllerutil.RemoveFinalizer(newp, r.Reconciler.Finalizer)

	err := r.Reconciler.SetOwner(r.Cluster, r.Object, s.Target, newp)
	if err != nil {
		return reconcile.TemporaryProblem(err)
	}
```

the replica state is prepared. An owner information is established
with `err := r.Reconciler.SetOwner(r.Cluster, r.Object, s.Target, newp)`

With

```go
	// update replica
	newp := r.Object.DeepCopyObject().(*Resource)
	newp.SetNamespace(namespace)
	objutils.CleanupMeta(newp)
	objutils.SetAnnotation(newp, controllers.REPLICATED_ANNOTATION, r.Cluster.GetId())
	controllerutil.RemoveFinalizer(newp, r.Reconciler.Finalizer)

	err := r.Reconciler.SetOwner(r.Cluster, r.Object, s.Target, newp)
	if err != nil {
		return reconcile.TemporaryProblem(err)
	}
```

it would be possible to transfer ther status from an existing target object,
not yet used for our demo resource.

