<!-- DO NOT MODIFY                   -->
<!-- this file is generated by mdref -->
<!-- from src/doc/controllers.md     -->

<a id="controllers"></a>
## Controllers

Controllers bundle a reconciler for a main resource, some locally used indices and triggers. Triggers
are watches on other resources (or clusters) triggering reconcilation of the main resource.

### Definition
<a id="controller-definitions"></a>

Controllers can be defined with the following functions:

- `controller.Define[*<resource>,<resource>](<name>, <cluster>, <factory>)`: Definition of a controller reconciling a *resource* using a reconcier provided by a factory with the following interface:
  ```go
  // ReconcilerFactory is responsible to create a reconciler for the
  // given object type.
  // Optionally it might implement ModifyFinalizer to influence the finalizer
  // name generation.
  type ReconcilerFactory[P kubecrtutils.ObjectPointer[T], T any] interface {
  	CreateReconciler(ctx context.Context, controller TypedController[P, T], b builder.Builder) (reconcile.Reconciler, error)
  }
  
  ```

  The factory can implement the [`Options`](options.md#options) interface 
  to request command line flags.

- `controller.DefineByFunc[*<resource>,<resource>](<name>, <cluster>, <function>)`: Definition of a controller reconciling a *resource* using a reconcier provided by a factory function with the following interface:

  ```go
  
  type ReconcilerFactoryFunc[P kubecrtutils.ObjectPointer[T], T any] func(ctx context.Context, controller TypedController[P, T], b builder.Builder) (reconcile.Reconciler, error)
  
  ```

The *cluster* is the cluster used to watch the given *resource*.
We need both types, the pointer type of the resource (implementing `client.Object` and the struct type) to offer the possibility to declate typed indices of the main resource. An index delivers the slice of struct types.

The complete interface is as follows:

```go
 
 type CompositionInterface[P kubecrtutils.ObjectPointer[T], T any] interface {
 	TypedDefinition[P, T]
 
 	WithFinalizer(string) CompositionInterface[P, T]
 	WithPredicates(preds ...predicate.Predicate) CompositionInterface[P, T]
 	// WithActivationConstraint declares additional activation rules
 	// relevant if this controller is activated.
 	WithActivationConstraint(...constraints.Constraint) CompositionInterface[P, T]
 	InGroup(...string) CompositionInterface[P, T]
 
 	AddForeignIndex(i ...cacheindex.Definition) CompositionInterface[P, T]
 	AddIndex(name string, indexerFunc cacheindex.TypedIndexerFunc[P]) CompositionInterface[P, T]
 	AddIndexByFactory(name string, indexerFunc cacheindex.TypedIndexerFactory[P]) CompositionInterface[P, T]
 	ImportIndex(reference cacheindex.Reference) CompositionInterface[P, T]
 	AddTrigger(trigger ...ResourceTriggerDefinition) CompositionInterface[P, T]
 	UseCluster(name ...string) CompositionInterface[P, T]
 	UseComponent(name ...string) CompositionInterface[P, T]
 }
 
```

#### Modifiers

Modifiers are used to declare nested features of the controllers.

- `InGroup(<name>)`: add controller to a controller group
- `UseCluster(<name>)`: declare the usage of an additional cluster.
- `WithFinalizer(<name>)`: Change the default finalizer name
- `WithPredicates(<preds> ...)`: Predicates
- `WithActivationConstraint(<constraints>...)`: Activation constraints defined in package [constraints](../controller/constraints).
- `UseComponent(<name>...)`: require access to a component. Those components are automatically activated, if the controller is active.

Activation constraints are used to automatically activate or deactivate controller and to validate possible controller selections.

Reconciler factories have access to the actual controller settings.
Here, they can access the declared indices and clusters, as well as options.

The controller has the following interface:
```go

type Controller interface {
	GetName() string
	GetOptions() flagutils.Options
	GetFieldManager() string
	GetFinalizer() string
	GetLogger() logging.Logger
	GetClusterMappings() mapping.Mappings
	GetClusters() Clusters
	GetComponents() Components
	GetIndices() Indices
	GetCluster() ClusterEquivalent
	GetLogicalCluster(name string) ClusterEquivalent
	GetResource() client.Object
	GetControllerManager() ControllerManager
	GetRecoder(ctx context.Context) record.EventRecorder
	GetReconciler() reconcile.Reconciler
	GetIndex(name string) Index
	GetOwnerHandler() OwnerHandler

	Complete(ctx context.Context) error

	GenerateNameFor(ctx context.Context, tgt Cluster, prefix, namespace, name string, len ...int) string
}
```

##### Triggers

A trigger is a watch on another resource (and potentially on another cluster) used to rigger the reconsilation of the maon resource on the controller's main cluster.

- `AddTrigger(<trigger definitions>)`: define triggers

There are two predefined trigger definition types:

- `ResourceTrigger[*<resource>](<map function>, <description>)`: trigger reconcilation with an additional resource watch mapping resources to reconcilation requests. The mapping supports a fleet member target.

- `ResourceTriggerByFactory[*<resource>](<map function factory>, <description>)`: Use a controller- and cluster-aware factory. Use `handler.Lift*` variants to reduce the awareness.

- `LocalResourceTrigger[*<resource>](<map function>, <description>)`:
   variant for effective local cluster triggering.

- `ResourceTriggerByFactory[*<resource>](<map function factory>, <description>)`: variant for effective local cluster triggering, only.

The first variants enable cross fleet member triggering. The second variants trigger reconcilation on the cluster/fleet member.

- `OwnerTrigger[*<resource>]()`: Trigger owners of given resource.

Trigger definitions have an optional modifier:

- `OnCluster(<cluster>)`: by default the watch is established on the controllers main cluster ([equivalent](clusters.md#clusters)). With this modifier it can be redirected to another declared logical cluster.
- 
##### Indices

There are two different kind of indices:
- indices on the main resource on the main cluster
- indices on other resource and/or clusters
  - indices defined by the controller
  - indices imported by the controller (expected to be defined somewhere else).

Indices use relative and absolute names. A relative name is the name as used in the declarations. The absolute name is composed by the local name and the name of the cluster it is defined for. 
Indices are deduplicated, considering the base name, resource and cluster. If an index is defined on multiple clusters, that are all mapped to the same physical cluster, the index is created only once.

In Go it is not possible to compare indexer functions, therefore, the base name of an index is meant to uniquely define the meaning independent of the used cluster. When orchestration index defining elements in the controller manager those *meanings* can be aligned with [mappings](indices.md#mapping)

When accessing indices from the controller. relative names can be used
for indices on the main cluster of the controller.
Other indices can be accessed by using theit global name (still using the local logical cluster names). A name can be composed with `cacheindex.ComposeName`.

If the name of foreign indices are unique in the scope of the controller, in addition to the global names, the relative names can also be used.

- `AddIndex(<relative name>, <typed indexer function>)`: Define an index on the main resource and cluster of the controller.
- `AddIndexByFactory(<relative name>, <typed indexer factory>)`: Define an index on the main resource and cluster of the controller using a factory.

- `AddForeignIndex(<index definitions>)`: use other [index definitions](indices.md#index-definitions)
- `ImportIndex(<index reference>)` use [index references](indices.md#index-references).

A factory (`func(<ctx>, <logger>, <clusters>) (<indexer function>, error)` has access to the actual settings when creating the inder function:
- *options*: use `cacheindex.OptionsFromContext`
- *controller*: use `controller.ControllerFromContext`

#### Mapping
<a id="controller-mappings"></a>

When controllers are orchestrated in a controller manager, their local names (for clusters, indices and components) can be mapped
to names unique in the scope of the controller manager.
This way, controller definitions must not be globally aligned to be orchestratable in a controller manager. Instead, the orchestrator
is responsible to configure a globally consistent mapping of local names.

A definition can be wrapped into a `WithMappings(<definition>)` call.
It provides some mapping methods:

- `MapCluster(<local>, <global>)`: map local cluster names
- `MapIndex(<local>, <global>)`: map local (relative) index names
- `MapComponent(<local>, <global>)`: map required local component names

The mapping of [absolute index names](indices.md#indices) involves the cluster and index mapping.

#### Reconciler Support

The uses by default the regular controller runtime for reconcilers.
In case of [fleets](clusters.md#clusters), the fleet member information is available via the context using 
- `clustercontext.CLusterFor(<ctx>)`: get the cluster object
- `clustercontext.ClusterNameFor(<ctx>)`: get the cluster name

All methods on a `Clusterequivalent` take a context and determine the effective cluster to execute the operation for from the context.

Above this low-level interface, there are three higer level abstractions:

- using a request object bases reconcilation logic (`logic.New`)
- using a request base reconciler using various factories (`factories.New`)
- using low-level request object based reconciler (`reconciler.New`)

All those wrappers bundle the reconcilation environment for 
a dedicated reconcilation request into a `reconciler.ReconcileRequest` object.
It provides access to dynamic information like the effective cluster and the
resource object (as modifiable version and as original version),
but also for shared information like the controller, the reconciler,
the options and explicitly arbitrarily maintained shared information provided by the various factory variants.

The underlying reconciler maps controller-runtime reconcilation requests to such an object. If the resource uses a status field/resource, it automatically checks whether the status has been changed and initiates a status update.

##### `reconciler.New`

This is the basic abstraction. It creates a reconciler factory based on a `reconciler.DefaultRequestFactoryFunc` function, able to create a `reconciler.ReconcileRequest`.

```go

type ReconcileRequest[T client.Object] interface {
	Request[T]
	ReconcilationLogic
}
```

This request must implement the reconcilation logic

```go

type ReconcilationLogic interface {
	Reconcile() myreconcile.Problem
	ReconcileDeleting() myreconcile.Problem
	ReconcileDeleted() myreconcile.Problem
}
```

and implement all theother request related method. This is supported
by providing a `reconciler.BaseRequest`, which can be embedded into the final reconcilation request object to implement all those state and methods.

There is a second more general flavor pair `reconciler.NewWithOptions`/`reconciler.DefaultRequestFactoryFuncWithOptions`, which allows to specify an `Options` type, which is added to
the reconciler factory and forwarded to the `baseRequest`-

##### `factories.New`

On top of this abstraction `factories.New` uses three separate factory functions (`Optionfactory`, `SettingsFactory`, and `RequestFactory`),
for options, the shared `Settings` and one for the request creation to
provide an appropriate factory and reconciler.

The provided factory has the interface 

```go

type Factory[O flagutils.Options, S any, P kubecrtutils.ObjectPointer[T], T any] interface {
	CreateOptions() O
	CreateSettings(ctx context.Context, o O, controller controller.TypedController[P, T]) (S, error)
	CreateRequest(*reconciler.BaseRequest[P], *Reconciler[O, S, P, T]) reconciler.ReconcileRequest[P]
}
```

and is implemented by a `DefaultFactory` using the factory functions.

A second flavor `factories.NewByFactory` directly take such an implementation

##### `logic.New`

This abstraction is based on the previous one and simplifies all the factory functions.

It only requires to implement the pure logic and shared state by implementing the interface ``

```go

type ReconcilationLogic[O flagutils.Options, S any, P kubecrtutils.ObjectPointer[T], T any] interface {
	CreateSettings(ctx context.Context, o O, controller controller.TypedController[P, T]) (S, error)
	Reconcile(request *Request[O, S, P, T]) myreconcile.Problem
	ReconcileDeleting(request *Request[O, S, P, T]) myreconcile.Problem
	ReconcileDeleted(request *Request[O, S, P, T]) myreconcile.Problem
}
```

A second flavor `NewWithOptions` addtionally accepts a type parameter for the `Options` type.

Both flavors use a standard implementation for the request, which does not be implemented separately anymore. It forwards
the logic implementation to the shared logic object by passing the request as argument.

This flavor is finally used by ur [walkthrough example](../README.md#walkthrough)